edit lock for transactions in "changed" event callbacks (#27285)
microsoft/FluidFramework: .changeset/tough-lies-say.md

---
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
"fluid-framework": minor
"__section": tree
---
Editing a SharedTree during its change-event callbacks now consistently throws

Editing a `SharedTree` from inside one of its change-event callbacks has always been forbidden, but one path was not being caught: edits (along with branch operations, reverts, transactions, etc.) made while the tree was emitting its post-change notification ran to completion instead of throwing.

Such edits would apply to the tree, trigger further change notifications, and could re-enter the same listener for the resulting commits.
This can produce infinite edit loops, redundant work across clients, incorrect attribution, broken undo/redo grouping, and pollution of the outer commit's label data.

This release closes that gap: editing the tree during a change-event callback now throws the same canonical `UsageError` as the other change-event callbacks:

```
Editing the tree is forbidden during a change event callback

> ```

Reviewer: Nit: I think this would be better expressed using a quote block
```suggestion
> Editing the tree is forbidden during a change event callback
```

Author: Updated with suggestion

---
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
"fluid-framework": minor
"__section": tree
---
The edit lock now also covers the `changed` event

> The existing edit-time lock that forbids tree mutations from inside a `nodeChanged` or `treeChanged` event listener now also covers the `changed` event.

Reviewer 2: What is this "changed" event on? Can you link the actual API docs for the event here?

Author: The `changed` event doesn't seem to live on the API docs because it's internal, so I have reworded the changeset to not mention `changed` event, and applied your suggestions below.

Direct edits, branch operations, reverts, etc. attempted from inside a `changed` listener now throw the same canonical `UsageError` they already throw from the other change-event listeners.

Previously the lock did not extend to `changed` emissions, so edits made from a `changed` listener ran to completion: they applied to the tree, their commits fired further `changed` events, and the listener could re-enter for those commits.
This pattern could produce infinite edit loops, redundant work across clients, incorrect attribution, broken undo/redo grouping, and pollution of the outer commit's label data.

The error message now names all three events:

```

> Editing the tree is forbidden during a nodeChanged, treeChanged, or changed event

Reviewer 2: Again I don't thus its very clear which event "changed" is referring to. Tons of things could have a changed event, and many of them (such as events on UI content, ddetached nodes, other trees) are fine to edit the tree in (at least some of the time). There are also likely plenty more events this should apply to (like schema changes)

I think we want an error more like:

```suggestion
Editing a SharedTree is forbidden during its event callbacks for changes.
```

Author: Updated with suggestion

```

Applications should not make edits in response to edits.

> If a derived edit is genuinely needed, drive it from a user action or apply it on a `TreeBranchAlpha` and merge from there.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this sentence makes a lot of sense. Using TreeBranchAlpha, which includes the main view which you presumable just got an event for isn't a solution. You could say make the event on a different branch, and drive merging that from a user action, but that's still likely to duplicate edits across all users and thus not a pattern we have good support for, and is also already covered by the suggestion to drive edits from user actions.

```suggestion
Generally edits should not be made in response to changes to the document: doing so tends to duplicate edits across multiple clients cause infinite edit loops, dirty last change attribution and be problematic in read only contexts.
Instead use alternative patterns like lazily fixing content when edited by a user, or asking a user if they want to repair the document.
If you are confident the desired change is atomic (even accounting for different application versions which might be involved) and/or won't trigger issues with other clients you can work around this restriction by asynchronously deferring the edit, but this pattern is not recommended.
```

Ideally though I'd like to find a place in our documentation covering this, which we can link to instead of just putting it here where it won't be seen much in the future.

Author: Updated `events.mdx` file to include your suggestion in "Editing in response to change events" section, and removed `TreeBranchAlpha` workaround in the changeset

---

> "@fluidframework/tree": minor

Reviewer 2: most of the tree APIs are reexported via the fluid-framework package, which is wat we encourage new users to adopt, so almost all changeset which apply to tree should include it as well.

Author: updated with `"fluid-framework": minor`

---
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
"__section": tree
---
Starting a transaction inside a tree-change event listener now produces a usage error

> Calling `runTransaction` or `runTransactionAsync` from inside a `nodeChanged` or `treeChanged` event listener now throws a `UsageError`.

Author: reworded to "Calling runTransaction from inside a nodeChanged or treeChanged event listener now throws a UsageError, and runTransactionAsync rejects with one."

This brings transactions into line with the existing rule that tree mutations from inside a change-event listener are forbidden.

Before this change, starting a transaction from a listener would push a transaction frame onto the running outer transaction's bookkeeping before the inner edit was attempted,
leaving the tree's transaction labels in a corrupted state even when the inner edit itself threw.

> The new check rejects the call before any state mutation, so the tree's transaction labels remain consistent.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this leave the tree in a broken state, so it's impossible for it to matter if the transaction labels are consistent or not?

Might be better to rephase this to something like:

```suggestion
The updated code throws a `UsageError` before it can corrupt anything.
```

Author: Updated with suggestion

The error message follows the existing format used by the other listener-time guards:

```
Running a transaction is forbidden during a nodeChanged or treeChanged event
```

After this error is thrown, the affected tree view enters a broken state and subsequent operations on it will throw an `Invalid use of ... after it was put into an invalid state` error.
Discard the view and acquire a fresh one to recover.

> #### Migration

Reviewer 2: What actually worked before? Could you make transactions, but they would crash if there were any edits in them (in which case they could only be no-ops), or could you actually slip transactions with real edits inside of them thorough our validation before this? If only the no-op case worked, I don't think there is anything to migrate, simply don't make no-op transactions inside events.

Author: I noticed that it was actually the `changed` event callback that had the biggest issue (which is now included in this PR), and for `treeChanged/nodeChanged` it was just no-op case that was silently passing. Updated the changeset to be more clear

If you start a transaction in response to a tree change, defer it out of the listener:

```typescript
// Before — throws at runtime
Tree.on(view.root, "nodeChanged", () => {
	view.runTransaction(() => {
		// ...
	});
});

// After — schedule the transaction outside the listener

> Tree.on(view.root, "nodeChanged", () => {

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should recommend this approach to people. Its bad for a few reasons:
1. If you do edits in response to document changes, its very easy to end up with edits triggering edits in a loop (on one client or between multiple clients) resulting in infinite edits, consuming unbounded bandwidth, storage, battery life CPU etc.
2. Its easy to end up with multiple edits, one from each client connected, fighting over making the change (even if all but the first are no-ops due to merge resolution, its inefficient)
3. It can lead to screwy attribution as the document show up last changed by a user who did not personally make the change
4. It can screw up undo/redo, as it creates a change by the current user, that was not trigger by any of that user's actual actions.
5. Its async, so its possible the edit trying to be done is no longer valid (a change could have happened in-between), the view could have been disposed, etc. If you need to do a change asynchronously, one should use a branch instead of holding onto the view or nodes async (unless they setup invalidation for the values they are holding onto which this example does not do).

I think we can simply say applications should not make edits in response to edits.

Author: Removed recommendation in changeset
